# MDCG 2025-10 - Guidance on Post-market Surveillance of Medical Devices and In Vitro Diagnostic Medical Devices

  Guidance on post-market surveillance of medical
  devices and in vitro diagnostic medical devices
  December 2025

This document has been endorsed by the Medical Device Coordination Group (MDCG)
established by Article 103 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745. The MDCG is composed of
representatives of all Member States and it is chaired by a representative of the European
Commission.
The document is not a European Commission document and it cannot be regarded as
reflecting the official position of the European Commission. Any views expressed in this
document are not legally binding and only the Court of Justice of the European Union can give
binding interpretations of Union law.

## Table of content
1      Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 3
2      Scope and Objectives .................................................................................................................. 4
3      The PMS System required by the MDR/IVDR ......................................................................... 4
3.1         General obligations ................................................................................................................. 4
3.2         Specific obligations for manufacturers of custom-made devices under the MDR ......... 6
4      The PMS plan................................................................................................................................ 6
5      The main activities of the PMS system ................................................................................... 10
5.1         Determining appropriate sources of available information for PMS .............................. 10
5.2         Collecting necessary data .................................................................................................... 13
5.3         Assessment and analysis of data........................................................................................ 13
5.4         Drawing conclusions and determining the need to take action(s).................................. 13
6      The interactions of the PMS system with other key aspects of the QMS .......................... 14
7      References................................................................................................................................... 18
Annex 1 Overview of PMS obligations in MDR and IVDR ........................................................... 20
## Annex 2 Scenarios IVD and medical devices: how to use PMS data to update other
processes............................................................................................................................................. 22

## 1 Introduction
Regulation (EU) 2017/745 on medical devices (MDR) and Regulation (EU) 2017/746 on in-
vitro diagnostic medical devices (IVDR) establish a regulatory framework to ensure a high level
of protection of the health and safety of patients, users and other individuals, whilst supporting
innovation. Devices may only be placed on the Union market if they comply with these
Regulations.

To ensure that devices remain compliant with the requirements of the Regulations and that
real-world experience gained from the use of the devices is taken into account for the product
realisation, manufacturers must have a Quality Management System1 (QMS) comprising a
Post-Market Surveillance (PMS) system2 in place. These systems should be proportionate to
the risk posed by the device and appropriate for the type of the device.

According to, respectively, Recitals 74 MDR and 75 IVDR, Article 10(10) of the MDR/IVDR,
manufacturers are required to implement and keep up to date a PMS system in accordance
with Article 83 MDR/Article 78 IVDR. This obligation reinforces the importance of a structured
and proactive PMS approach as an integral part of the manufacturer’s QMS3.
Manufacturers need to play an active role during the post-market phase by:
  • Systematically and actively gathering information from post-market experience with
      their devices.
  • Using this information to update their technical documentation.
  • Cooperating with national competent authorities responsible for vigilance and market
      surveillance.

To support this, manufacturers must:
   • Establish a comprehensive PMS system, set up under their QMS.
   • Base the PMS system on a PMS plan.

Data and insights from PMS activities must be used to:
   • Update relevant parts of the technical documentation (e.g., risk assessment, clinical
       evaluation).
   • identify the need for preventive and/or corrective action.
   • Enhance transparency (e.g. through the SS(C)P)

PMS is a continuous process. Manufacturers must carry out PMS throughout the lifetime4 of a
device to monitor its safety, quality and performance.

After having established the initial PMS plan, which is part of the technical documentation5, the
first PMS process cycle begins when the first device has been placed on the market/put into
service and concludes with a report. However, surveillance activities and data collection must
be systematically performed and recorded on a continuous, ongoing basis, throughout the

    Article 10(9) MDR/IVDR
## 2 Article 10(10) MDR/IVDR
## 3 Article 83(1) MDR/Article 78(1) IVDR
  For further clarification on the meaning of device lifetime, refer to section Device lifetime of the MDCG 2022-21
Guidance on Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR) according to Regulation (EU) 2017/745 (MDR).
https://health.ec.europa.eu/latest-updates/mdcg-2022-21-guidance-periodic-safety-update-report-psur-according-
regulation-eu-2017745-december-2022-12-16_en
## 5 Article 84 MDR/Article 79 IVDR

entire period between the first placing on the market/putting into service and the end of the
intended lifetime of the last device placed on the market/put into service.

## 2 Scope and Objectives
Unless otherwise stated, this guidance is applicable to all medical devices (MDs) and in vitro
diagnostic medical devices (IVDs). The main objectives of this guidance are:
    1. To describe the PMS system.
    2. To describe the PMS plan.
    3. To describe the main activities within the PMS system.
## 4. To clarify the interactions of the PMS system in accordance with Article 83 MDR/Article
## 78 IVDR with other key aspects of the QMS as described in Article 10(9) MDR and
       Article 10(8) IVDR).

Out of scope:

    •   This guidance does not provide details on how a manufacturer should prepare a
        periodic safety update report (‘PSUR’) or a post-market surveillance report. Specific
        guidance on PSUR is provided in MDCG 2022-21. Although not covering post-market
        surveillance reports, MDCG 2022-21 may provide useful suggestions on how a
        manufacturer can present information in a post-market surveillance report.

    •   This guidance does not cover the requirements for health institution exemption under
        Article 5(5) MDR/IVDR (in-house devices), though it is expected that health institutions
        review experience gained from the use of in-house devices and take all necessary
        corrective actions6.

Where this guidance references terms defined or aspects clarified in other documents, the
relevant sources are cited.
Unless otherwise stated, the definitions provided in Article 2 MDR and IVDR apply for this
guidance document. Furthermore, the term ‘device‘ is used as outlined in Article 1(4) MDR and
Article 1(2) IVDR.

## 3 The PMS System required by the MDR/IVDR
Article 10(9)(i) MDR and Article 10(8)(i) IVDR refer to a PMS system in accordance with Article
83 MDR/Article 78 IVDR. Manufacturers are required to ‘plan, establish, document, implement,
maintain and update’ a PMS system which is to be implemented effectively and in a manner
‘that is proportionate to the risk class and appropriate for the type of device7.

### 3.1 General obligations
The PMS system must be suited to actively and systematically gathering, recording and
analysing relevant data on the quality, performance and safety of a device throughout its entire

6 For further information on requirements for in-house devices, refer to MDCG 2023-1 Guidance on the health

institution exemption under Article 5(5) of Regulation (EU) 2017/745 and Regulation (EU) 2017/746.
https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2023-01/mdcg_2023-1_en.pdf
## 7 Article 83(1) MDR/Article 78(1) IVDR

lifetime. It must also enable the manufacturer to draw the necessary conclusions and support
the determination, implementation and monitoring of any preventive or corrective actions.8
In addition to this requirement, it is in the manufacturer’s interest to use the PMS data to identify
options to improve the usability, performance, and safety of the device.
The PMS system interfaces directly with other aspects of the QMS, such as
clinical/performance evaluation and risk management (see section 6 for further clarification on
the interactions of the PMS system with other key aspects of the QMS).
Figure 1 below provides a general, high-level overview of the PMS system as integral part of
the manufacturer’s QMS.

                                             Quality Management System

                                          Post-Market Surveillance System

                      Technical Documentation on Post-Market Surveillance consists of
                        • Post-Market Surveillance Plan (PMS plan)
                        • Reports: PMS Report / PSUR

                                            Post-Market Surveillance plan
                                                    (PMS plan)

                 Systematically and actively gathering information from post-market
                 experience with their devices.

                 See Table 1 for detailed information on the elements to be covered in a PMS plan.

                 Update any relevant part of technical documentation with:
                  • relevant data and information gathered through post-market surveillance
                  • lessons learned from any implemented corrective or preventive action

                                                           Reports
                                    Post-Market                         Periodic Safety
                                 Surveillance Report                    Update Report
                                    (PMS report)                            (PSUR)
                                 MDR: for class I                   MDR: for class IIa, IIb and III
                                 IVDR: for class A and B            IVDR: for class C and D

                                 Clinical Evaluation
                                                                    Benefit-Risk Determination
                                        (MDR)
                                                                      and Risk Management,
                               Performance Evaluation
## Annex I, Chapter I MDR/IVDR
                                        (IVDR)

 Figure 1: High-level Overview of the PMS system and the Technical Documentation on Post-Market Surveillance. The
 figure shows hat the PMS system is an integral part of the Quality Management System and the information gathered
 from post-market experience of the device is not only driving updates to the Technical Documentation on PMS but is
 also an input to other processes of the Quality Management System, such as clinical/performance evaluation and risk
 management.
 Note: The figure provides is a high-level overview and is not meant to be exhaustive. It does not include all details or
 account for every possible scenario.

## 8 Article 83(2) MDR/Article 78(2) IVDR

For a successful implementation of the PMS system the manufacturer must provide for
appropriate structures, procedures, processes and resources. The effectiveness of the PMS
system should be reported to top management, e.g., via management review.
An overview of PMS obligations laid down in the MDR and IVDR is provided in Annex 1 of this
guidance.

### 3.2 Specific obligations for manufacturers of custom-made devices
    under the MDR
The PMS requirements according to Article 83 MDR are applicable to all devices including
Custom-Made Devices (CMD). Section 5 of Annex XIII MDR states that “The manufacturer
shall review, and document experience gained in the post-production phase, including from
PMCF as referred to in Part B of Annex XIV MDR, and implement appropriate means to apply
any necessary corrective action. In that context, it is required to report in accordance with
Article 87(1) MDR to the competent authorities any serious incidents or field safety corrective
actions or both as soon as it learns of them.”

Post-market review is mainly focused on the expected performance. A PMCF plan is therefore
required. This implies that for a CMD, the manufacturer needs to establish and maintain a PMS
system, and to document the experience gained from the post-production phase. Therefore,
even though that Article 84 does not clearly state that the PMS plan should be part of the
documentation held in accordance with Annex XIII MDR, it doesn’t remove the obligation for a
PMS plan. It is recommended that the manufacturer plan and document its experience gained
in the post-production phase, including from PMCF as referred to in Part B of Annex XIV MDR,
and implement appropriate means to apply any necessary corrective action as stated in section
5 of Annex XIII MDR.
For class I devices, the CMD manufacturer must establish a PMS report according to Article
## 85 MDR whereas, for classes IIa, IIb and III devices, a Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR)
according to Article 86 MDR must be established. Both the PMS report and the PSUR should
be part of the CMD documentation according to section 2 of Annex XIII MDR.
To implement a MDR compliant post-market surveillance system, the CMD manufacturer
should establish appropriate communication channels with relevant healthcare
providers/professionals or patients to receive feedback on the quality, performance and in
particular the clinical performance and safety of the devices in the field.
For risk management, post-market surveillance and clinical evaluation life cycle processes as
defined by the MDR, CMD manufacturers should apply these obligations to groups of devices
with the same intended purpose, materials and processes used, principal design etc. and not
to each individual CMD9. In the PMS plan, the relevant CMD placed on the market should be
part of the scope.

## 4 The PMS plan
Article 84 MDR/Article 79 IVDR refer to the PMS system being based on a PMS plan, which is
part of the technical documentation (except for custom-made devices under the MDR). The
requirements for the PMS plan are outlined in section 1 of Annex III of both the MDR and IVDR.

## 9 This is clarified in MDCG 2021-3 Questions and Answers on Custom-Made Devices

https://health.ec.europa.eu/document/download/385d7e20-d8b5-49d0-abd7-
8daf269bf1b8_en?filename=mdcg_2021-3_en.pdf

PMS planning starts already during the development of a device. The manufacturer should
think ahead and determine which activities should be carried out to systematically and
proactively collect experience gained from devices they place on the market or put into
service10.
Each device must be covered by a PMS plan. A plan can cover a single device or a group of
devices. For example, devices with the same manufacturing process, design and intended
purpose, or in the same device family can be covered by the same PMS plan. The plan should
clearly state which devices are included within its scope.
The PMS plan specifies the aspects of the device or group of devices to be monitored, the
frequency of monitoring, and the methods to be applied. The chosen methods should be
appropriate and based on the device’s risk profile, and the rationale for selecting these
methods needs to be documented.
Although the fourth indent of section 1(b) of Annex III MDR/IVDR requires that methods and
procedures are covered in the PMS plan, in practical terms, the PMS plan should define what
types of methods are to be applied. An explanation of how and by whom these methods are
to be applied may instead be covered by procedures that are referenced within the PMS plan.
The concept of "proactive" is central to understand the requirements set out in section 1(b) of
## Annex III MDR/IVDR, which describe the PMS plan to ensure a “proactive”11 information
collecting process. Similarly, the term “proactive” appears in sections 5 and 6.1 of Part B of
## Annex XIV MDR and section 4 and 5.1 of Part B of Annex XIII IVDR in the context of Post-
Market Clinical Follow-up (PMCF) and Post-Market Performance Follow-up (PMPF).
“Proactive” emphasizes the manufacturer's obligation to actively seek out available information
and not merely wait for it to arrive through channels such as complaints. Manufacturers should
play an active role during the post-market phase by systematically and actively gathering
information from post-market experience with their devices.
This involves deliberately planning the gathering or generating information from a variety of
sources. These may include, but are not limited to, customer surveys, gathering of clinical
experience, user feedback, screening of scientific literature, other clinical data sources, meta-
analyses of published clinical data, evaluation of suitable registers, and post-market studies.
Manufacturers should determine the appropriate methods, and the choice of methods should
be tailored to the specific device or group of devices and reflect the level of innovation and
research activity within the relevant field.
The PMS plan should also reference procedures and frequencies related to the output of the
plan, such as a PMS report for class I devices per Article 85 MDR and classes A and B devices
per Article 80 IVDR and a PSUR for all other classifications per Article 86 MDR/Article 81 IVDR.
Table 1 on the next pages provides a summary of the elements to be covered in the PMS plan
as per section 1(b) of Annex III MDR/IVDR. It also details effective and appropriate methods
and processes for assessing the collected data, including explanations and examples of these
methods.

     Article 2(60) MDR / Article 2(63) IVDR
## 11 See Annex III, section 1(b), first indent MDR/IVDR

 Table 1. Summary of the elements to be covered in the PMS plan per section 1(b) of Annex III MDR/IVDR

    Required per section 1(b) of Annex III MDR/IVDR                                    Explanation                                            Examples of content in the PMS plan12

 — a proactive and systematic process to collect any         Manufacturers are expected to collect the information referred       -   List of activities with references to procedure(s) for collecting
 information referred to in point (a). The process shall     to in section 1(a) of Annex III MDR/IVDR and to use it to                the information referred to in section 1(a) of Annex III
 allow a correct characterisation of the performance of      address understanding of device usage, safety and                        MDR/IVDR.
 the devices and shall also allow a comparison to be         performance, usability as well as identify areas for                 -   Sources of data regarding similar products
 made between the device and similar products13              improvement. By collecting information on similar products,          -   Frequency of the activity and the role(s)/function(s)
 available on the market                                     the manufacturer can compare their device with similar                   responsible, if not already specified elsewhere.
                                                             products on the market (in terms of design or intended use).
                                                             The information is used to demonstrate that the device
                                                             remains state of the art (SOTA)14.
 — effective and appropriate methods and processes           Methods and processes for assessing the data are expected            -   Methods to be applied (e.g., qualitative, or quantitative,
 to assess the collected data                                to be proportionate to the type of device. The methods                   statistical methods) and processes for assessing the collected
                                                             selected are also dependent upon the type and quality of the             data, along with rationale.
                                                             collected raw data15. It is expected that higher-risk devices will   -   List of parameters to be analysed for example:
                                                             require more specific methods of data analysis.                             o side effect or type of incident, device malfunction,
                                                                                                                                               hazard, harm, complaint rate, severity, etc.
                                                                                                                                  -   List of the measurable values for example:
                                                                                                                                         o batch, batch quantity, hours/frequency of use, number
                                                                                                                                               of devices in use/sold, number of exposures, etc.
 — suitable indicators and threshold values that shall       Suitable indicators and threshold values (i.e., limits beyond        -   Indicators and thresholds relevant for assessing the impact;
 be used in the continuous reassessment of the               which action should be taken) are to be established in the pre-          on hazards and the frequency of occurrence thereof,
 benefit-risk analysis and of the risk management as         market phase. The data obtained through PMS activities is fed            on estimates of their associated risks,
 referred to in section 3 of Annex I MDR/IVDR                back into the risk management process and used to re-                    as well as on the overall risk, benefit-risk ratio, and risk
                                                             evaluate indicators and threshold values.                                acceptability.
 — effective and appropriate methods and tools to            Methods and tools are expected to be proportionate to the type       -   Methods to be applied (e.g., qualitative, or quantitative,
 investigate complaints and analyze market-related           of device: For higher-risk devices, more rigorous approaches             statistical methods) and processes for analysing the collected
 experience collected in the field                           to investigation and analysis of complaints and other market-            data, along with rationale, for example.
                                                             related experience may be required.                                         o methods described in IMDRF Adverse event
                                                                                                                                               Terminology Annex B16, Cause Investigation -Type of
                                                                                                                                               Investigation.

12 These examples are intended to provide guidance to manufacturers. They should not be understood as mandatory elements. It is up to the manufacturer to select the most appropriate

methods, parameters, values, processes, and tools depending on the nature and usage of the device.
13 In this context the terms “products” and “devices” have the same meaning.
   State of the art should be understood as: Developed stage of current technical capability and/or accepted clinical practice in regard to products, processes and patient management, based on
the relevant consolidated findings of science, technology and experience. Source: Essential Principles of Safety and Performance of Medical Devices and IVD Medical Devices, IMDRF/GRRP
WG/N47.
## 15 CEN ISO/TR 20146:2020 Medical devices – post-market surveillance for manufacturers (ISO/TR 20416:2020)

 https://standards.cencenelec.eu/ords/f?p=CEN:110:::::FSP_PROJECT,FSP_ORG_ID:66261,581003&cs=1614CA9C900CA51B856D1D3B8744BFC3D
## 16 IMDRF Adverse event Terminology Annex B

 https://www.imdrf.org/working-groups/adverse-event-terminology/annex-b-cause-investigation-type-investigation
 — methods and protocols to manage the incidents          Non-serious incidents or clearly documented expected                 -   References to relevant procedures and statistical methods to
 subject to the trend report as provided for in Article   undesirable side-effects may be subject to trend reporting. It           be applied along with parameters to be monitored, including
 88 MDR/Article 83 IVDR, including the methods and        is expected that the methodology used for determining any                threshold values and indicators.
 protocols to be used to establish any statistically      statistically significant increase in the frequency or severity of   -   Relevant procedures, documentation, and methods/criteria for
 significant increase in the frequency or severity of     such incidents, as well as the observation period are defined            submitting reports.
 incidents as well as the observation period              in the PMS plan, or a reference is made to associated                -   Details of the frequency of the activity and the
                                                          procedure(s)) that specify those aspects.                                role(s)/function(s) responsible, if not already specified
                                                                                                                                   elsewhere.
 —methods and protocols to communicate effectively        Manufacturers must establish processes to ensure effective           -   References to relevant procedures, i.e., to contact and inform
 with competent authorities, notified bodies,             communication with competent authorities, notified bodies,               competent authorities, notified bodies, other economic
 economic operators, and users                            other economic operators and users (including patients and               operators, and users – including patients and customers.
                                                          customers) with respect to the output of PMS activities.             -   Details of, or reference to forms, communication methods and
                                                                                                                                   data transfer tools which may be used, and the
                                                                                                                                   role(s)/function(s) responsible, if not already specified
                                                                                                                                   elsewhere.
 — reference to procedures to fulfil the manufacturers    Procedures must be in place to enable the implementation of          -   References to relevant procedures, i.e., to generate/update
 obligations laid down in MDR Articles 83, 84 and 86      the PMS system, as well as for generating PMS-related plans              PMS plans, reports, etc.
 or IVDR Articles 78, 79 and 81                           and reports.                                                         -   Details of the frequency of the activity and the
                                                                                                                                   role(s)/function(s) responsible, if not already specified
                                                                                                                                   elsewhere.
 — systematic procedures to identify and initiate         Procedures are expected to describe criteria for corrective          -   List of identified criteria which would lead to the initiation of
 appropriate measures including corrective actions        actions and the type of measure to be undertaken (such as                appropriate measures or corrective action. Details of the
                                                          documenting a nonconformance, initiating a CAPA or FSCA                  role(s)/function(s) within the organisation responsible for
                                                          according to the impact or risk posed by the issue identified.           specific tasks as part of an action plan.
 — effective tools to trace and identify devices for      Tools used to identify and trace devices for which corrective        -   List of methods and/or tools to trace and identify devices
 which corrective actions might be necessary              actions might be necessary must be described. Procedures                 affected by an issue requiring corrective action.
                                                          describing controls for non-conforming devices (e.g., recall         -   References to relevant procedures, i.e., to identify and trace
                                                          and quarantine) and identification of relevant economic                  devices using specified tools.
                                                          operators are expected to be referenced.                             -   Details of the role(s)/function(s) within the organisation
                                                                                                                                   responsible for specific tasks as part of a corrective action
                                                                                                                                   plan.
 — a PMCF plan as referred to in Part B of Annex XIV,     The PMCF/PMPF plan17 is an integral part of the PMS plan. If         -   Description of planned PMCF/PMPF activities and
 or a justification as to why a PMCF is not applicable    the manufacturer determines that no specific PMCF/PMPF                   justification.
 (MDR)                                                    activities are required, a justification is required.                -   Reference to a detailed PMCF/PMPF plan/protocol, where
                                                                                                                                   appropriate.
 — a PMPF plan as referred to in Part B of Annex XIII,                                                                         -   Reference to relevant procedures.
 or a justification as to why a PMPF is not applicable                                                                         -   Details of the frequency of the activity and the
 (IVDR)                                                                                                                            role(s)/function(s) responsible, if not already specified
                                                                                                                                   elsewhere.
                                                                                                                               -   Justification as to why a PMCF/PMPF is not applicable, if
                                                                                                                                   appropriate.

## 17 See also MDCG 2020-7 Post-market clinical follow-up (PMCF) Plan Template

https://health.ec.europa.eu/document/download/a5cdb303-c782-4010-8723-7d389af678f7_en?filename=md_mdcg_2020_7_guidance_pmcf_plan_template_en.pdf

## 5    The main activities of the PMS system
The PMS system should be suited to actively and systematically gathering, recording, and
analysing relevant data on the quality, performance, and safety of a device throughout its entire
lifetime. This chapter explains the different steps in the cycle of PMS, including the collection,
assessment and analysis of post-market data and guidance on how to process the outputs.

### 5.1 Determining appropriate sources of available information for PMS
The manufacturer should decide which sources are relevant and appropriate for the device
concerned. When selecting data sources, the different economic operators, users (healthcare
professionals, patient, or lay users) and the situation in which the devices are used need to be
considered. The examples given in Table 2 are intended to provide guidance to manufacturers.
They should not be understood as mandatory elements.

It is up to the manufacturer to select the most appropriate methods, parameters, values,
processes, and tools depending on the type of the device. Data quality and integrity should be
considered before analysing data to ensure the information is reliable. For example, the use
of unverifiable data can lead to over-reaction, as it can be based on non-scientific data sources
such as social and public media.
Table 2 on the next pages provides an explanation of each indent of section 1(a) of Annex III
MDR/IVDR. It describes the information that should be collected and how this should be
utilised.

Table 2. Breakdown of Section 1(a) Annex III MDR/IVDR: Information to be collected and use of that information

   Required Information as per               Examples of information to be collected to fulfill                                    Use of information obtained through PMS
section 1(a) of Annex III MDR/IVDR      requirements as per section 1(a) of Annex III MDR/IVDR
Information concerning serious         Outputs from procedures to receive, document, investigate and       Information may contribute to:
incidents, including information       analyze serious incidents received from customers, users,           -    identification of emerging risks, or previously unknown side effects
from PSURs, and field safety           healthcare professionals, patients, or other economic operators.    -    demonstration of the continued acceptability of the performance and safety of the device
corrective actions                                                                                         -    tracking any emerging or developments to practices or benefits associate with device
                                       Information/feedback gathered during design, implementation              use (SOTA)
                                       and tracking of progress and effectiveness of field safety          -    the determination of reportability of incidents to the competent authority/notified body
                                       corrective actions.                                                 -    the identification and investigation of trends
Records referring to non-serious       Outputs from procedures to receive, document, investigate and       -    comparison of the device with similar products on the market
incidents and data on any              analyze:                                                            -    identification of new benefits of the device
undesirable side-effects               - incidents determined to be non-serious.                           -    identification of possible systematic misuse or off-label use of the device
                                       - complaints and information.
                                       - service and repair records including those received from          Information may support identification of need for:
                                       customers, users, healthcare professionals, patients, other         -    corrective or preventive action (CAPA)
                                       economic operators.                                                 -    field safety corrective action (FSCA)
                                                                                                           -    options to improve the usability, performance, and safety of the device, if applicable, to
Information from trend reporting       Outputs from procedures, systems and methodologies                       contribute to the PMS of other devices.
                                       established for trending of non-serious incidents, undesirable      -    Information to be notified to Competent Authorities/Notified Body:
                                       side effects and expected erroneous results received from                      o report serious incidents and corrective and preventive actions18
                                       customers, users, healthcare professionals, patients, other                    o report field safety corrective actions
                                       economic operators                                                  -    improvement of internal processes such as internal PMS, vigilance, CAPA, and design
Relevant specialist or technical       Literature review/clinical evaluation process/ external database         control
literature, databases and/or           evaluation process regarding the device(s) in question. For         -    reporting of trends in accordance with Article 88 MDR/ Article 83 IVDR
registers                              example:                                                            -    design changes including improving usability, performance and or safety.
                                       -    Screening literature for reports involving the device(s) in
                                            question.                                                      Information may be used to update the:
                                       -    Searching competent authority websites and databases,          -    indicators and threshold values for continuous reassessment of the benefit-risk analysis
                                            including EUDAMED.                                             -    risk management
                                       -    Searching device registers or registries, where available.     -    Benefit-risk determination and to improve the risk management.
                                       Other published information including clinical guidelines, health   -    design and manufacturing information, the IFU and the labelling
                                       technology assessments/reports.                                     -    clinical/performance evaluation
Information, including feedback        For example:                                                        -    SS(C)P
and complaints, provided by users,     -    Surveys of users, customers, distributors, importers, and      -    technical documentation
distributors, and importers;                other stakeholders.                                            -    PMS plan and PMCF/PMPF plan
                                                                                                           -    risk management including need for CAPA or FSCA
                                       -    Feedback received during user training, education,
                                                                                                           -    labelling, IFU or other documentation
                                            workshops.

  18 For further explanation see MDCG 2023-3 Questions and Answers on vigilance terms and concepts as outlined in the Regulation (EU) 2017/745 on medical devices.

  https://health.ec.europa.eu/document/download/af1433fd-ed64-4c53-abc7-612a7f16f976_en?filename=mdcg_2023-3_en.pdf

                                 -   Reported complaints other than serious incidents.             -   processes to determine reportability of incidents
                                     Feedback obtained through sales channels including
                                     internet or digital sales, and customer service departments   Information may be used to prepare the:
                                     or marketing activities.                                      -    PMS report as per Article 85 MDR/ Article 80 IVDR
                                                                                                   -    PSUR as per Article 86 MDR/Article 81 IVDR
Publicly available information   Information presented in this section needs to be publicly        -    PMCF/PMPF evaluation report
about similar devices            available and relates to similar devices.                         -    Clinical/Performance Evaluation report
                                 For example:
                                 -    Screening the literature for reports involving similar
                                      devices.
                                 -    Searching competent authority websites and databases,
                                      including EUDAMED.
                                 -    Searching device registers or registries, where available.
                                 -    Other published information including manufacturer
                                      website, Instructions for use (IFU) and labelling, SS(C)P.
                                 -    Information available from third countries (worldwide).
                                 -    Information on safety and performance gained from
                                      conferences, congresses, and commercial exhibitions.

### 5.2 Collecting necessary data
The MDR and IVDR require a manufacturer to develop a robust PMS system that enables
them to gather, record and analyse relevant data on the quality, performance, and safety of a
device throughout its entire lifetime actively and systematically. In this way, information is
sought to gain insight into the real-world performance of the device.
The data collection for PMS typically starts once a manufacturer declares the device's
conformity with the requirements of the applicable Regulation and places it on the market or
puts it into service.

When gathering PMS data, manufacturers should establish the processes for receiving,
reviewing, and evaluating information, including the screening of scientific literature, feedback
and complaints provided by users, distributors, importers or other third parties.

In some instances, manufacturers may be required to generate data relating to real-world use
of the device. This is especially applicable in the case of higher risk devices and/or devices
with novel features or applications, in most cases through specific methods and procedures of
PMCF/PMPF.

### 5.3 Assessment and analysis of data
The PMS system should include the manufacturer’s processes and methods that are used to
effectively assess and analyse the data collected under the PMS plan. In assessing the data,
the manufacturer should refer to the objectives of their PMS (and PMCF/PMPF) plan to
evaluate whether those objectives have been achieved.
Data is assessed to analyse and characterise the performance of the device and to enable
comparisons with similar devices, thus allowing the manufacturer to confirm the continued
acceptability of the benefit-risk ratio. If the analysis reveals previously unknown side effects or
device deficiencies, the manufacturer should ensure that the processes linked to their risk
management are followed.
The manufacturer should also reflect on the performance of their device versus the generally
accepted State of the Art (SOTA)19, taking into consideration datasets relating to different
patient populations, device combinations and/or models and variants.

Furthermore, when assessing the data, it is important that data from different sources is
compared, and conflicting data identified and evaluated. Data quality and validity should be
evaluated to enable the drawing of appropriate conclusions and where necessary to identify
suitable actions.

### 5.4 Drawing conclusions and determining the need to take action(s)
As outlined in Article 83(2) MDR/Article 78(2) IVDR, drawing the necessary conclusions and
determining the need to take any preventive and corrective actions20 are central aspects of the
manufacturer´s assessment of the overall device safety and performance.

## 19 Annex I, Chapter 1, Section 1 MDR/IVDR
20 As explained in the MDCG 2022-21, Corrective or Preventive Action(s) (CAPA) which are covered by Article

83(4) MDR, Article 78(4) IVDR first sentence, can be made available to the competent authorities either through
the PSUR or PMS report. All relevant information can be found in the section 2.1.2. of MDCG 2022-21.

The drawing of conclusions should be based on the analysis of the data collected.
Furthermore, those conclusions and the actions taken subsequently need to be documented
in (an update of) a summary report, either in the PMS report or in the PSUR21.

Following the outcome of that report, a review of the current PMS plan may be necessary. This
will drive the level of PMS activity required for the next cycle of PMS (based on the device
class, historical data, similar products and including the need for PMCF/ PMPF for example).

## 6 The interactions of the PMS system with other key aspects of
  the QMS
Article 83(3) MDR/Article 78(3) IVDR specifically request that information generated from PMS
activities should be used as input, on a continuous basis, to other processes within the QMS.
Table 3 on the next page provides an overview of potential activities to be considered to fulfill
the requirements listed in Article 83(3) MDR/Article 78(3) IVDR.
## Annex 2 of this guidance provides examples demonstrating the various elements and
interactions of a post-market surveillance system with other key aspects of the quality
management system.

     MDCG 2022-21 Guidance on Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR) according to Regulation (EU) 2017/745.

Table 3. Interactions of the PMS system with other key aspects of the QMS

Required Information per Article 83(3)            General                                                                      Activity
MDR/78(3) IVDR
Update the benefit-risk determination and the     Information obtained through PMS activities should be used in the benefit-       •      Establish procedures to adequately address the
risk management (Art. 83(3)(a) MDR/Art.           risk determination process and in the continuous assessment of the overall              interface between PMS and the risk
78(3)(a) IVDR)                                    benefit-risk profile of the device to ensure that the benefit-risk profile              management process
                                                  remains acceptable. Furthermore, the data should be utilised to update the       •      Analyse and appraise the data collected by the
                                                  risk management documentation.                                                          planned and established PMS activities
                                                                                                                                   •      Assess the impact of collected data on the
                                                  The suitable indicators and threshold values used in the continuous                     probability and the severity ratings of existing
                                                  reassessment of the benefit-risk analysis of the device should be covered               risks or if new risks were identified
                                                  in the PMS plan and be linked to the risk management documentation (as           •      Evaluate the impact of the collected information
                                                  referred to Annex I, section 3 MDR/ IVDR).                                              on the overall risk, benefit-risk ratio and risk
                                                                                                                                          acceptability.
                                                  Changes to the benefit-risk profile of the device as a result of PMS
                                                  information should be identified, documented, and evaluated for
                                                  acceptability. The need to initiate appropriate measures, including
                                                  corrective and preventive action should be considered.

Update the design and manufacturing               Information obtained through the PMS process should be used to evaluate          •      Take appropriate action when evidence of new or
information, instructions for use and labelling   the need for updating the design and manufacturing information, the                     increased risks is identified (for example, through
(Art. 83(3)(b) MDR/Art. 78(3)(b) IVDR)            instructions for use and the labelling. Therefore, a manufacturer should                identifying previously unknown side-effects and
                                                  ensure that its design and development process consider PMS data as an                  monitoring of identified side-effects and
                                                  input.                                                                                  contraindications, or through identifying possible
                                                                                                                                          systematic misuse or off-label use of the device.
                                                                                                                                          This could include but is not limited to updates or
                                                                                                                                          changes to the design of the device itself or to the
                                                                                                                                          labelling and IFU.

Update clinical evaluation / performance          PMCF/PMPF should be addressed in the manufacturer's PMS plan and                 •      Consider the outputs of any relevant data
evaluation (Art. 61 and Art. 83(3)(c) MDR/        should be performed pursuant to a documented method laid down in a                      associated with PMS in the process of updating
Art. 56 and Art. 78(3)(c) IVDR                    PMCF/PMPF plan that specifies the general and specific methods and                      the manufacturer’s clinical evaluation or
                                                  procedures for proactively collecting and evaluating the collected                      performance evaluation.
                                                  clinical/performance data. The linkage of the PMS plan to the PMCF/PMPF          •      Analyse the findings of the PMCF/PMPF and
                                                  plan is also described in indent 10, section 1(b) of Annex III MDR/IVDR.22              document the results in a PMCF/PMPF
                                                                                                                                          evaluation report that should be used to update
                                                  Under the MDR, clinically relevant information coming from PMS, in                      the clinical evaluation/performance evaluation
                                                  particular the PMCF data, is considered “clinical data”. Annex XIV Part B               and the technical documentation. The

22 The general and specific methods and procedures of PMCF/PMPF are described in MDCG 2019-9 Summary of safety and clinical performance

https://health.ec.europa.eu/document/download/5f082b2f-8d51-495c-9ab9-985a9f39ece4_en?filename=md_mdcg_2019_9_sscp_en.pdf
and in MDCG 2022-9 Summary of safety and performance template
https://health.ec.europa.eu/document/download/b7cf356f-733f-4dce-9800-0933ff73622a_en?filename=mdcg_2022-9_en.pdf

                                              MDR specifies that PMCF must be understood as a continuous process                conclusions of the PMCF/PMPF evaluation
                                              that updates the clinical evaluation.                                             report must be taken into account in the clinical
                                                                                                                                evaluation/performance evaluation and the risk
                                              Specifically, data obtained by conducting PMCF is aiming to:                      management (referred to in section 3 of Annex I
                                                •    confirm the safety and performance of the device throughout its            MDR/IVDR).
                                                     expected lifetime.
                                                •    identify previously unknown side-effects and monitor the identified    •   Consider this data from the perspective of the
                                                     side-effects and contraindications.                                        overall benefit-risk assessment of the device
                                                •    identify and analyze emergent risks on the basis of factual                and in context with existing clinical data or
                                                     evidence.                                                                  performance data from the device’s previous
                                                •    ensure the continued acceptability of benefit-risk ratio.                  clinical/performance evaluation. If the need for
                                                •    identify possible systematic misuse or off-label use of the device,        corrective or preventive measures has been
                                                     with a view to verify that the intended purpose is correct.                identified, the manufacturer should implement
                                                                                                                                them.
                                              Under the IVDR, performance relevant information coming from PMS, in
                                              particular the PMPF data, is considered “relevant scientific data” and
                                              “performance evaluation results”. Annex XIII, Part B specifies that PMPF
                                              must be understood as a continuous process that updates the performance
                                              evaluation.

                                              Specifically, data obtained by conducting PMPF is aiming to:
                                                 •     confirm the safety and performance of the device throughout its
                                                       expected lifetime,
                                                 •     identify previously unknown risks or limits to performance and
                                                       contra-indications,
                                                 •     identify and analyse emergent risks on the basis of factual
                                                       evidence,
                                                 •     ensure the continued acceptability of the clinical evidence and of
                                                       the benefit-risk ratio.
                                                 •     Identify possible systematic misuse.

Update the summary of safety and (clinical)   The SS(C)P is applicable to class III and implantable devices (MDR) and       •   Within the PMS System, describe how the PMS
performance (SS(C)P)                          class C and class D devices (IVDR). The purpose of the SS(C)P is to               data is used to update the SS(C)P, when
(Art. 32 and Art. 83(3)(d) MDR/Art. 29 and    provide transparency of the clinical data held on the device including            applicable23.
Art. 78(3)(d) IVDR)                           aspects of safety and performance to the health care professional and,        •   Assess any new information generated from the
                                              where applicable, patients.                                                       PMS system for impact on the benefit-risk-profile
                                                                                                                                (safety/performance profile) for update to the
                                                                                                                                SS(C)P. Such updates should be aligned with
                                                                                                                                the information presented in the

23 For more information see MDCG 2019-9 Summary of safety and clinical performance and MDCG 2022-9 Summary of safety and performance template.

                                                                                                                                 clinical/performance evaluation report and
                                                                                                                                 Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR).
Identify needs for preventive, corrective, or   Manufacturers should set up their PMS system not only to actively collect    •   Set up processes and procedures to integrate the
field safety corrective actions                 but also analyse and utilise relevant data on the quality, performance,          data obtained by the PMS system into the QMS,
(Art. 83(3)(e) MDR/Art. 78(3)(e) IVDR)          and safety of a device throughout its entire lifetime. The manufacturer          in order to initiate and document corrective and
                                                should draw the necessary conclusions as to whether implementation of            preventive actions24 as well as field safety
                                                corrective or preventive actions is required.                                    corrective actions to reduce the risk posed by
                                                                                                                                 devices already placed on the market.

Identify options to improve usability,          Information obtained through the PMS process should be used to identify      •   Ensure design and development process
performance and safety of the device            options to improve the usability, safety, or performance of the device           defines PMS as input to usability, safety, or
(Art. 83(3)(f) MDR/Art. 78(3)(f) IVDR)          through linkage to the design and development process. These actions can         performance of the device.
                                                be more proactive and strategic and are not necessarily tied to identified
                                                risks. They aim to enhance user experience, clinical outcomes, or
                                                operational efficiency rather than specifically addressing hazards.

Contribute to PMS of other devices              PMS data regarding the usability, performance, and safety of one device      •   When relevant, use the collected information,
(Art. 83(3)(g) MDR/Art. 78(3)(g) IVDR)          can contain useful information for the manufacturer’s other devices. Any         analysis, and conclusions as input to the PMS of
                                                new or increased risk identified should be considered by the                     other devices. The PMS system can utilize PMS
                                                manufacturer as to whether it is likely that other devices that share the        data systematically across other devices.
                                                same or similar intended purpose, design or processing characteristics
                                                could be impacted by this new information.
Detect and report trends (Art. 83(3)(h) MDR     Information gathered on non-serious incidents, expected undesirable          •   Review any statistically significant increase in the
and Art. 88 MDR/Art. 78(3)(h) and Art. 83       side-effects (MDR), or expected erroneous results (IVDR) should be               frequency or severity that could have a significant
IVDR)                                           analysed for any statistically significant increase in the frequency or          impact on the benefit-risk profile, and which has
                                                severity of those events.                                                        led or may lead to risks to the health or safety of
                                                                                                                                 patients, users or other persons that are
                                                                                                                                 unacceptable when weighed against the intended
                                                                                                                                 benefits. These are subject to trend reporting,
                                                                                                                                 according to MDR and IVDR requirements.

24Article 2(67) MDR/ Article 2(70) IVDR, and EN ISO 13485:2016.

## 7 References
This guidance has been developed taking into consideration the following documents, either
in their entirety or partially:

     •   EN ISO 13485:2016 Medical devices — Quality management systems —
         Requirements for regulatory purposes (ISO 13485:2016) + AC:2018 + A11:202125
     •   EN ISO 14971:2019 Medical devices – Application of risk management to medical
         devices (ISO 14971:2019) + A11:202126
     •   EN ISO 14155:2020 Clinical investigation of medical devices for human subjects -
         Good clinical practice (ISO 14155:2020) + A11:202427
     •   EN ISO 20916:2024 In vitro diagnostic medical devices — Clinical performance studies
         using specimens from human subjects — Good study practice (ISO 20916:2019)28
     •   EN 62366-1:2015 Medical devices — Part 1: Application of usability engineering to
         medical devices29
     •   CEN ISO/TR 20416:2020 - Medical devices - Post-market surveillance for
         manufacturers (ISO/TR 20416:2020)30
     •   Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1182 of 16 July 2021 on the
         harmonised standards for medical devices drafted in support of Regulation (EU)
         2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council31 (consolidated version)
     •   Guidance for post-market surveillance and market surveillance of medical devices,
         including in vitro diagnostics, World Health Organization32

  EN ISO 13485:2016
https://standards.cencenelec.eu/ords/f?p=CEN:110:::::FSP_PROJECT,FSP_ORG_ID:37957,581003&cs=15C284A
8BCE79EE9233A08DD6ECF0271E (harmonized and cited in the OJEU in support of the MDR and IVDR with the
corrigendum AC:2018 and the amendment A11:2021), see https://health.ec.europa.eu/medical-devices-topics-
interest/harmonised-standards_en
  EN ISO 14971:2019
https://standards.cencenelec.eu/ords/f?p=CEN:110:::::FSP_PROJECT,FSP_ORG_ID:63920,581003&cs=106EB5B
4C6029ECDFA9802360A2C340E9 (harmonized and cited in the OJEU in support of the MDR and IVDR with the
amendment A11:2021).
  EN ISO 14155:2020
https://standards.cencenelec.eu/ords/f?p=CEN:110:::::FSP_PROJECT,FSP_ORG_ID:62983,6187&cs=102F2E9B41
968B33AA15E88BA07B87ECF (harmonized and cited in the OJEU in support of the MDR with the amendment
A11:2024).
  EN ISO 20916:2024
https://standards.cencenelec.eu/ords/f?p=CEN:110:::::FSP_PROJECT,FSP_ORG_ID:71064,6122&cs=194A987D4
1DF05904FABE8BA5CB8BA30C (harmonized and cited in the OJEU in support of the IVDR).
   EN 62366-1:2015
https://standards.cencenelec.eu/ords/f?p=CENELEC:110:::::FSP_PROJECT,FSP_ORG_ID:44040,1257161&cs=192
42C77366C169B0ED9D4F230B8778FE, (to be harmonised and cited in the OJEU in support of the MDR and
IVDR).
  CEN ISO/TR 20416:2020
https://standards.cencenelec.eu/ords/f?p=CEN:110:::::FSP_PROJECT,FSP_ORG_ID:66261,581003&cs=1614CA9
C900CA51B856D1D3B8744BFC3D, (technical report).
  COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2021/1182 of 16 July 2021 on the harmonised standards for
medical devices drafted in support of Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council
 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dec_impl/2021/1182/
   Guidance for post-market surveillance and market surveillance of medical devices, including in vitro
diagnostics (WHO)
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240015319

     •   IMDRF/GRRP WG/N47 Essential Principles of Safety and Performance of Medical
         Devices and IVD Medical Devices33

 https://www.imdrf.org/documents/essential-principles-safety-and-performance-medical-devices-and-ivd-
medical-devices

## Annex 1 Overview of PMS obligations in MDR and IVDR

PMS System - Article 83 MDR/Article 78 IVDR
Description                                   Obligations
Comprehensive     system     to     collect   MDR/IVDR: Applicable for all device classes.
experience from use of the devices.             • Proactive and systematic approach to collect data.
                                                • Analyse relevant data on the quality, performance, and
                                                    safety of a device throughout its entire lifetime.
                                                • Draw the necessary conclusion.
                                                • Connect with other internal processes like CAPA,
                                                    vigilance, design, and labeling processes.
                                                • Has to be used to update the technical documentation,
                                                    (except for custom-made devices).
                                                • Integral part of the manufacturer QMS.
PMS Plan - Article 84 & Annex III MDR/Article 79 & Annex III IVDR
Description                                   Obligations
Describes the implementation of the PMS       MDR/IVDR: Applicable for all device classes.
system to collect data assess the safety         • Part of the QMS and the technical documentation.
and the performance of the devices and           • Defines the data to be collected based on the PMS
the methodology used for collecting and               inputs of the manufacturer.
analysing the data.                              • Describes:
                                                          o the methods and protocols to monitor trends, to
                                                              identify significant increase in frequency or
                                                              severity of incidents.
                                                          o the methods and tools to investigate complaints
                                                              and analyse market-related experience
                                                              collected in the field.
                                                          o the indicators and thresholds to be used to
                                                              reassess the benefit-risk ratio.
                                                          o the tools to be used to trace and identify any
                                                              devices in case corrective actions are needed.

                                                         o  the PMCF/PMPF plan or a justification why
                                                            PMCF/PMPF is not applicable.
                                                 •   Describes the references to the documented
                                                     procedures for:
                                                         o PMS system
                                                         o Creation of PMS plan
                                                         o Generation of PMS report or PSUR as
                                                             applicable.
                                                         o Corrective actions
                                                         o Risk management
PMS Report, Article 85 MDR/Article 80 IVDR
Description                                   Obligations

A summary of the results and conclusions      MDR: applicable to class I devices
of analysis of the PMS data collected         IVDR: applicable to class A and B devices

                                              What information a PMS report contain at a minimum?
                                                 • A summary of the results and the conclusions of the
                                                      analyses/assessment of the post-market surveillance
                                                      data resulting from the execution of the PMS plan.
                                                 • A rationale and description of any corrective or
                                                      preventive actions taken during the period covered by
                                                      the report.

                                               The guidance MDCG 2022-2134 although not covering the PMS
                                               report, may provide useful suggestions on how information can
                                               be presented.

                                               When does a PMS report need to be updated?
                                                  • Update according to the PMS plan or earlier when
                                                     deemed necessary by the manufacturer.

                                               To whom does a PMS report need to be made available?
                                                   • To competent authority upon request.
 PSUR - Article 86 MDR/Article 81 IVDR
 Description                                   Obligations
 A summary of the results and conclusions      MDR: applicable to class IIa, IIb and III devices
 of analysis of the PMS data collected.        IVDR: applicable to class C and D devices
                                               Detailed guidance on PSUR can be found in MDCG 2022-21

34 MDCG 2022-21 Guidance on Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR) according to Regulation (EU) 2017/745.

## 1   Annex 2 Scenarios IVD and medical devices: how to use PMS data to
2   update other processes

4   Figure Note: The examples presented in the following figures are entirely fictitious and provided solely for
5   illustrative purposes. These examples should not be interpreted as real-world scenarios or recommendations.
## 6   They are intended to demonstrate the various elements and interactions of a post-market surveillance (PMS)
7   system within the broader framework of a quality management system (QMS).

## 8   IVDs:

        Key:                                     Increase in the number of serious incidents due to incorrect values
                                                                 provided by blood glucose test strips
          Start & End of the process

                   Process

                 Sub-Process

                                                      Review and analyse the reported cases and confirm the
                                                                  number of related complaints
                  Decision

                 Docume nt

                                                       Results of the investigation of the complaints showed
                                                       that glucose test strips released by the manufacturer
                                                                     were out-of-specification.
                                                      Patient used test strips according to instructions for use
                                                         but readings provided incorrect values leading to
                                                      incorrect insulin dosage. This resulted in hypoglycemic
                                                                     shock and hospitalisation.

                                                                         CAPA is required
                                                                       Article 78 (3)(e) IVDR

                                                                       Corrective Action(s) to
                                                                             be taken

                                                                                                 Field Action is required
                                                                                                                            Perform FSCA
                                                                                                  Article 78 (3)(e) IVDR

                                        Assess impact to other IVDs of the
                                                  manufacturer                                                                Submit FSCA Report to CA
                                              Article 78 (3)(g) IVDR

                                        Improve the manufacturing process                                                   Send evaluated FSN to inform
                                          by including additional quality                                                   economic operators/users of
                                       control steps to prevent reoccurence                                                 the non-conforming products

                                                                    Monitor the implementation
                                                                                                                               Recall the affected test
                                                                     of the corrective action(s)
                                                                                                                               strips from the market

                                                                                                                              Inform the Notified Body
                                                                                                                                   about the recall
## 10   Medical Devices:
     Key:

        Start & End of the process                   Increase in number of complaints related to premature battery depletion
                                                                   implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs)
                 Process

               Sub-Process

                Decision                                      Review and analyse the reported cases and confirm the                      Trend Report required?i
                                                                          number of related complaints                                     Article 83 3.(h) MDR
               Document

                                                                Investigation of the complaints showed that lithium
       Inform the supplier of the battery of the
                                                              deposition within the battery led to short circuits in the
       Received complaints and cooperate with
                                                                   device, thereby causing battery depletion. The
         the supplier as part of the complaint
                                                               company had "underestimated the occurrence of the
                    investigations
                                                                                hazardous situation."

                                                               New risk identified: Without any back-up, the battery
                                                               depletion issue had the potential to cause an abrupt
                                                                stoppage of the life-saving pacemaker in patients,
                                                                                  leading to death

                                                                                   CAPA is required
                                                                                 Article 83 3.(e) MDR

                                                                                Corrective Action(s) to
                                                                                      be taken
            Supplier of battery
            implements design
                 change
                                           Redesign of the battery by the supplier
                                                    to correct this issue
                                                                                                          Field Action is required
                                                   Article 83 3.(b) MDR                                                                     Perform FSCA
                                                                                                           Article 83 3.(e) MDR
      Change Notification - Inform
      the Notfied Body about the
           significant change              Update the instructions for use and the
                                            labelling with these residual risks as                                                           Submit FSCA Report to CA
                                                          applicable                             Assess impact to other devices of the
                                                    Article 83 3.(b) MDR                                    manufacturer
                                                                                                         Article 83 3.(g) MDR
                                                                                                                                            Send evaluated FSN to inform
                                                                                                                                             customers of the improper
                                            Perform a risk analysis and assess the                                                             functioning of the device
             Update of the Risk
                                            acceptability of these residual risks as                                                         which could lead to power
             Management File
                                            well as the benefit-risk determination                                                            failure and the associated
            Article 83 3.(a) MDR                                                                                Update the
                                                     Article 83 3.(a) MDR                                                                                recall
                                                                                                            clinical evaluation
                                                                                                           Article 83 3.(c) MDR

            Change Request -
                                            Update the design and manufacturing                                                                 Recall the affected
        Inform the supplier and                                                                      Update the SSCP as applicable
                                                        information                                                                           devices from the market
         initiate a change of the                                                                        Article 83 3.(d) MDR
                                                    Article 83 3.(b) MDR
                   device

                                                                                                                                             Inform the Notified Body
                                                                            Monitor the implementation                                            about the recall
                                                                             of the corrective action(s)
12   i: Although in this example trend reporting is not applicable, following DSVG MDCG 2024-1-3, it has been added to indicate the
13   relevant processes, in a highly theoretical situation.
