# MDCG 2019-9 Rev.1 — Summary of Safety and Clinical Performance

      Summary of safety and clinical performance
      A guide for manufacturers and notified bodies

      March 2022

This document has been endorsed by the Medical Device Coordination Group (MDCG)
established by Article 103 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745. The MDCG is composed of
representatives of all Member States and it is chaired by a representative of the
European Commission.

The document is not a European Commission document and it cannot be regarded as
reflecting the official position of the European Commission. Any views expressed in
this document are not legally binding and only the Court of Justice of the European
Union can give binding interpretations of Union law.

section 3.1             clarification on the association of the SSCP with the
                        Basic UDI-DI in EUDAMED
general requirements    addition of a manufacturer reference number
and template

Summary of safety and clinical performance
A guide for manufacturers and notified bodies

March 2022

## Table of contents

MDCG 2019-9 ....................................................................................................................................................... 3

Table of contents .................................................................................................................................................. 3

Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................ 4

Abbreviations ........................................................................................................................................................ 4

General requirements and recommendations for the SSCP ......................................................................... 5

Validation and uploading of the SSCP .............................................................................................................. 8

Guidance for each of the required sections of the SSCP document .......................................................... 11

## 1. The identification of the device and the manufacturer, including the Basic UDI-DI and, if already
issued, the SRN .................................................................................................................................................. 11

## 2.      The intended purpose of the device and any indications, contraindications and target populations12

## 3. A description of the device, including a reference to previous generation(s) or variants if such exist,
and a description of the differences, as well as, where relevant, a description of any accessories, other
devices and products, which are intended to be used in combination with the device ............................ 12

4.      Information on any residual risks and any undesirable effects, warnings and precautions............ 14

## 5. The summary of clinical evaluation as referred to in Annex XIV, and relevant information on post-
market clinical follow-up .................................................................................................................................... 16

6.      Possible diagnostic or therapeutic alternatives ..................................................................................... 20

7.      Suggested profile and training for users ................................................................................................ 20

8.      Reference to any harmonised standards and CS applied ................................................................... 20

9.      Revision history .......................................................................................................................................... 21

References .......................................................................................................................................................... 21

Appendix: Template for the SSCP ................................................................................................................... 22

## Introduction

The Regulation (EU) 2017/745 on medical devices (1) requires that the
manufacturer shall draw up a summary of safety and clinical performance (SSCP)
for implantable devices and for class III devices, other than custom-made or
investigational devices. The SSCP shall be validated by a notified body (NB) and
made available to the public via the European database on medical devices
(Eudamed)1.

The SSCP is intended to provide public access to an updated summary of clinical
data2 and other information about the safety and clinical performance of the medical
device. The SSCP will be an important source of information for intended users –
both healthcare professionals and if relevant for patients. It is one of several means
intended to fulfil the objectives of the Medical Device Regulation (MDR) to enhance
transparency and provide adequate access to information3.

The SSCP is not intended to:
    give general advice on the diagnosis or treatment of particular medical
     conditions, nor
    replace the instructions for use (IFU) as the main document that will be
     provided to ensure the safe use of a particular device, nor
    replace the mandatory information on implant cards4 or in any other
     mandatory documents.

The main purpose of this document is to provide guidance on the presentation,
content and validation of the SSCP. The word “shall” is used when there is a
corresponding “shall” in the MDR, otherwise “should” or “recommended” etc. is used
indicating the interpretation of the MDR.

## Abbreviations

CIV ID          clinical investigation identification number, generated by Eudamed for
                clinical investigations under the Medical Device Directives (2) (3)
CMR             carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to reproduction
CS              ‘common specifications’ as defined in the MDR5
EU              European Union
Eudamed         European database on medical devices
FSCA            field safety corrective action6
FSN             field safety notice7
IFU             instructions for use
MDR             Medical Device Regulation (1)

  MDR, Article 32 (1)
  MDR, Article 32 (2)(f) , Article 61 (11) and Article 83 (3)(d)
  MDR, Recital (43)
  MDR, Article 18
  MDR, Article 2 (71)
  MDR, Article 2 (68)
  MDR, Article 2(69)

NB              notified body8
PMCF            post-market clinical follow-up9
PMS             post-market surveillance10
PSUR            periodic safety update report11
SRN             single registration number for an economic operator12
SSCP            summary of safety and clinical performance
TD              technical documentation13
UDI-DI          Unique Device Identification - device identifier14
URL             Uniform Resource Locator (internet address)

General requirements and recommendations for the SSCP

The information in the SSCP should be sourced entirely from the technical
documentation (TD) of the device15. Examples of such documents are design
verification/validation reports, the risk management report/file, the clinical evaluation
report, and post-market surveillance (PMS) and post-market clinical follow-up
(PMCF) plans and reports. The IFU includes information extracted from the same
sources as the SSCP, but may itself be used as a source for the SSCP if
appropriate.

The manufacturer will assign to the SSCP an identifier (reference number) that
within the manufacturer’s management system is unique to that SSCP and will
remain the same for the entire lifetime of the SSCP. In combination with the
manufacturer’s SRN this will allow for the unique identification of the SSCP in
EUDAMED and in EU.

The SSCP shall be kept updated in Eudamed16. When the PMCF evaluation report17
and the periodic safety update report (PSUR)18 are updated at least annually19, the
SSCP shall be reviewed and updated20 if needed to ensure that any clinical and/or
safety information in the SSCP remains correct and complete. When updating the
SSCP, all sections of the document shall be updated if needed so that they are in
alignment with the most current version of the relevant parts of the TD of the device.

This guide outlines the minimum content of the SSCP. The manufacturer may add
further information from the TD of the device to enhance the comprehension of the
mandatory information providing:

  MDR, Article 2 (42)
  MDR, Annex XIV Part B
   MDR, Article 2 (60)
   MDR, Article 86 Periodic safety update report
   MDR, Article 31(2)
   MDR, as specified in Annexes II and III.
   MDR, Article 2 (15) and Article 27
   MDR, Annex II and III
   MDR, Article 29 (4) and Annex VI Part A 2.14
   MDR, Article 61 (11)
   MDR, Article 86 (1)
   MDR Article 86 (1); PSUR for class IIa devices shall be updated when necessary and at least every two years
   MDR, Article 61 (11) and Article 83 (3)(d)

        it does not affect the readability of the SSCP and
        it excludes any element of a promotional nature.

The SSCP shall be objective and adequately summarise both favourable and
unfavourable data21.

For further guidance on the contents of the SSCP, please refer to sections 1-8 of this
document and to the template in the Appendix. The format and structure of this
template is recommended. It addresses all of the SSCP content requirements of the
MDR22, but the order has been revised to enhance its presentation.

The IFU shall contain all that is needed to directly find the SSCP in Eudamed. The
following applies to the IFU23.
     It shall state that the SSCP is available in the European database on medical
       devices (Eudamed), where it is linked to the Basic UDI-DI.
     It should provide the URL to the Eudamed public website:
       https://ec.europa.eu/tools/eudamed
     It should state the value of the Basic UDI-DI. Alternatively, another metadata
       can be stated provided it can be used to unambiguously search and find the
       intended SSCP in Eudamed.

Translations to other EU languages
No single language will be understood by all intended users and patients in the EU –
see the European Survey on Language Competences initiated by the European
Commission (4). In order to meet the requirement in the MDR that the SSCP shall
be written in a way that is clear to the intended user and, if relevant, to the patient 24,
the SSCP should be translated into the languages accepted in the Member States
where the device is envisaged to be sold. This is by analogy with the requirement for
an IFU25. Note that Member States may have different language requirements for an
IFU depending on whether the information is intended for health care professionals
or for patients. The SSCP part intended for patients should be provided in all the
languages required for IFUs intended for patients in the Member States concerned.

If the selection of European languages for the SSCP does not include English, then
an English translation of the document should also be provided. English is the most
common language used in medical scientific publications and is understood by many
healthcare professionals in the EU. Always providing an English-language version of
the SSCP further enhances access to information26 about devices available on the
EU market.

There should be one SSCP document for each language. Each SSCP document
should state in which language the SSCP was validated by the NB. The
manufacturer should ensure, through their quality management system, that the

   MDR, Annex XIV, Part A Clinical evaluation, (2)
   MDR, Article 32 (2)
   MDR, Article 32 (1) and Annex I, 23.4 (d)
   MDR, Article 32 (1) and Recital (43)
   MDR, Annex II (2), Article 10 (11)
   MDR, Recital (43)

translations are correct.

Relevant SSCP information for patients
The MDR indicates that patients are also intended recipients of the information in the
SSCP, “if relevant”27. Devices for which information will be especially relevant for
patients include:
    implantable devices for which patients will be given implant cards28, and
    class III devices that are intended to be used directly by patients.

For these devices, a part of the SSCP specifically intended for patients should be
provided.

Note: Devices listed in MDR Annex XVI, and eligible for a SSCP, should always be
considered as relevant for patient information.

For devices other than the two groups listed above, including any devices listed in
## Annex XVI and eligible for a SSCP, the manufacturer may consider whether it is
relevant to provide specific information intended for patients. This can be based on
the manufacturer’s analysis of the device in question.

Readability
The SSCP should always have one part for intended users/healthcare professionals,
and when it is relevant (see above) a second part for patients. Both should be clear
and provide information at an appropriate depth to reflect the healthcare
professionals’ and the patients’ different levels of knowledge29.

For further guidance, see references (5) and (6) in this guide. It should not be
assumed that the patient has any formal education in a medical discipline or any
prior knowledge of medical terminology or clinical research. It is recommended that
the readability of the part of the SSCP intended for patients is assessed for example
by a test given to lay persons. The manufacturer may use a method it finds
adequate for the readability test to confirm that the SSCP is written in a way that is
clear to the patient30.

Medical terminology, relevant for the medical device and the clinical context, should
be used consistently throughout the part of the SSCP that is intended for healthcare
professionals.

Stylistic recommendations
The SSCP should be presented in an organised and unambiguous manner.

Usually, abbreviations and acronyms should not be used; if they are, then in the text,
the abbreviation or acronym should follow the full phrase it is intended to replace. It
may then be used thereafter throughout the document.

   MDR, Article 32 (1)
   MDR, Article 18
   MDR, Article 32 (1) and Recital (43)
   MDR, Article 32(1), Article 2 (38)

Medical terms should be explained in simple language in the parts intended for
patients. Consistency should be assured by giving the lay term with a description
first, and then the medical term immediately afterwards (in brackets). On a case-by-
case basis the lay or medical term (but preferably the lay term) may then be used
throughout the part intended for patients.

It is recommended to keep the information for patients/lay persons and for intended
users/healthcare professionals in two separate parts of the SSCP, separated by a
“page break”. This enhances their readability and facilitates printing of each part
separately. See the template in the Appendix of this document.

The SSCP should be written in a font type and size which allow easy reading. Since
the SSCP is intended for the public, it needs to be in a format that everyone can
read (and that is not editable) without the need for a license. Therefore the SSCP file
uploaded in Eudamed should be in PDF format. When downloaded, the PDF file
should be printable and searchable with the search function in the program used to
view the file, for example the Adobe Reader.

Validation and uploading of the SSCP

Validation of the initial SSCP by the NB
When the NB has assessed that all the required elements31 are included in the draft
SSCP, accurately presented and in alignment with the most current version of
relevant documents in the TD, the SSCP has been validated by the NB.

In the circumstance that the conformity assessment is performed according to Annex
X and XI in the MDR and there are two NBs involved, it is the NB which assesses
the TD according to Annex X that shall validate the SSCP.

The validation of the SSCP by the NB covers only one of the language(s) accepted
by the NB and agreed with the manufacturer. The manufacturer should state in the
revision history in each SSCP document in which language the SSCP was validated
by the NB.

The timing of the SSCP validation may depend on the class of device and the
conformity assessment routes:
    For class III devices and class IIb implantable devices, except sutures and
      staples etc.32, the validation is performed when a draft SSCP as a part of the
      application documents is submitted to the NB involved in the conformity
      assessment33, prior to issuing the certificate.
    For class IIa implantable and some IIb implantable devices such as sutures
      and staples etc34, a draft SSCP as a part of the application documents shall
      be submitted to the NB involved in the conformity assessment. The draft
      SSCP shall be validated by the NB35.

   MDR, Article 32 (2), Article 61 (11), and Article 83 (3) (d)
   MDR, Article 52 (4) 2nd paragraph
   MDR, Article 32 (1)
   MDR, Article 52 (4) 2nd paragraph
   MDR, Article 32 (1)

         In the circumstance if more than one device is covered by the relevant
         certificate, at least one draft SSCP shall be validated against relevant
         documents in the TD during the initial conformity assessment, prior to issuing
         the certificate.

         Draft SSCPs that are not validated at the initial conformity assessment, shall
         be validated against relevant documents in the TD at least once during the
         period of validity of the certificate.

Validation of updates of the SSCP between certification activities
The manufacturer has an obligation to keep the SSCP updated; for further details
see the section “General requirements and recommendations for the SSCP” in this
guide. Furthermore the manufacturer shall prepare a periodic safety update report
(PSUR) that includes data gathered as a result of the post-market surveillance plan,
description of any preventive and corrective actions taken, conclusions of the
benefit-risk determination, and the main findings of the PMCF36.
If the PSUR contains information rendering any information in the SSCP incorrect or
incomplete, the SSCP shall be updated37 to be in line with the information in the
most recent PSUR.

The manufacturer shall submit a PSUR to the NB at least annually, or for class IIa
implantable devices38 at least every two years39.
If the SSCP has been updated with new/changed information, except for strictly
editorial modifications, the manufacturer should submit the updated SSCP to the NB
when submitting the required PSUR.
      If the SSCP has been previously validated, the NB should validate the updated
        SSCP against the submitted and evaluated PSUR. Both the NB and the
        manufacturer should make an effort to keep the validation time short in order to
        meet the MDR requirement of an update of the SSCP at least annually if
        indicated40.
      If the SSCP has not previously been validated41, the NB may defer the
        validation until a validation against the relevant documents in the TD is planned
        during the period of validity of the certificate.

In addition, as part of its surveillance activities, the NB shall verify that the
manufacturer has appropriately updated the SSCP. The NB should take into
consideration its assessment of the PMS plan and PSUR, the PMCF plan and its
evaluation report, and/or other relevant information.

   MDR, Article 86 (1)
   MDR, Article 29 (4) and Annex VI Part A 2.14, and Article 61 (11) and Article 83 (3)(d)
   In this context applicable for implantable devices intended to be placed in the teeth, MDR Annex VIII, 5.4. Rule
8)
   MDR, Article 86 (1)
   MDR, Article 61 (11)
   May only be applicable for class IIa implantable devices and some IIb implantable devices such as sutures,
staples etc. as listed in MDR, Article 52 (4) 2nd paragraph

Validation of SSCP at certificate renewal
With each certificate renewal application, the manufacturer should:
    For class III devices and class IIb implantable devices, other than sutures and
      staples etc.42, submit a draft SSCP which has been updated within the previous
      12 months, regardless of whether there are new data or conclusions.
    For class IIa implantable and IIb implantable devices, such as sutures and
      staples etc.43, confirm that the SSCP in Eudamed is in alignment with the
      current version of the TD, or provide an updated SSCP where required.

At certificate renewal, the same principles should apply for the validation of the
SSCP documents as at the initial certification.

Uploading of the SSCP in Eudamed
The SSCP shall be uploaded in Eudamed by the NB44, which is the only actor that
can manage the SSCPs in Eudamed. Timelines for uploading of the SSCP
documents in Eudamed:
    The NB shall upload the SSCP validated in conjunction with an initial
     conformity assessment at the same time that it uploads the issued certificate.
    For class IIa implantable and IIb implantable devices, such as sutures and
     staples etc.45, the NB shall upload the SSCPs of all the devices covered by
     the issued certificate at the same time that it uploads the issued certificate,
     even if some of the SSCPs have not been validated yet, and are to be
     validated during the period of validity of the certificate.
     The manufacturer should state in a revision history in the SSCP document
     whether that revision was validated by the NB. It is important and should be
     transparent to the public46 whether the SSCP document has been validated
     yet by the NB. See the example of a revision history in section 9 and in the
     template in the Appendix of this guide.
    The NB shall upload a SSCP whenever it has been validated against relevant
     documents in the TD, and thus replacing the SSCP uploaded at the initial
     certification with the currently validated revision.
    The manufacturer is responsible for the translations of the SSCP into other
     languages47, once the “master” SSCP has been uploaded by the NB.
     If the “master” SSCP is in a language other than English, then an English
     translation should be provided by the manufacturer within 90 days of the
     upload of the “master” SSCP. The NB should upload the English translation
     within 15 days of receiving this from the manufacturer.
    The manufacturer decides when it translates the initial “master” SSCP into
     other languages in the Member States depending on when/if they plan to
     place the product on that market.
     The NB does not validate the translated SSCP documents. It should upload
     them in Eudamed within 15 days of receiving them.

   MDR, Article 52 (4) 2nd paragraph
   MDR, Article 52 (4) 2nd paragraph
   MDR, Article 32 (1)
   MDR, Article 52 (4) 2nd paragraph
   MDR, Recital (43)
   See page 4 in this guide, Translations to other EU languages; The manufacturer should ensure, through their
quality management system, that the translations are correct.

     The manufacturer shall verify that the SSCP, and any translations needed for any
     single Member State, have been uploaded in Eudamed before placing a device on
     that market48.

          When receiving an updated SSCP document in conjunction with the PSUR,
           the NB should upload the updated SSCP document within 15 days after it is
           validated, or within 15 days after deeming the validation to be deferred49 until
           a validation against the relevant documents in the TD is planned during the
           period of validity of the certificate.
          At certificate renewal, the NB shall upload any updated SSCPs of all the
           devices covered by the reissued certificate at the same time that it uploads
           the reissued certificate. The NB should ensure the revision history indicates
           whether or not these have been validated by the NB.
          The manufacturer should provide updated translations to the NB within 90
           days of the upload of the updated “master” SSCP. The NB should upload
           these translations within 15 days of receiving them from the manufacturer.

Guidance for each of the required sections of the SSCP document

## 1.        The identification of the device and the manufacturer, including the Basic
          UDI-DI and, if already issued, the SRN

          The first section of the SSCP shall identify the device and the manufacturer, and
          should also contain some general information related to the device:

### 1.1. Device trade name(s) (this include all trade names the device may have on
               the market in different Member States)
### 1.2. Manufacturer’s name and address
### 1.3. Manufacturer’s SRN (single registration number)
### 1.4. Basic UDI-DI
### 1.5. Medical device nomenclature50 description / text
### 1.6. Class of device51
### 1.7. Year when the first certificate (CE) was issued covering the device
### 1.8. Authorised representative if applicable; name and the SRN
### 1.9. NB’s name (the NB that will validate the SSCP) and the NB’s single
               identification number52

   MDR, Article 29 (4) and Section 2 of Part A of Annex VI (2.14)
   May only be applicable for class IIa implantable devices and some IIb implantable devices as listed in MDR,
Article 52 (4) 2nd paragraph
   MDR, Article 26
   MDR, Annex VIII
   MDR, Article 43 (1)

## 2.       The intended purpose of the device and any indications, contraindications
         and target populations

          2.1. The device's intended purpose(s) shall be described.

### 2.2. The indications shall be described. This includes the stages and/or severities
               of the pathologies, the specific medical conditions, and the specific
               anatomical locations or confirmation that no anatomical locations are
               contraindicated, as applicable. The target population(s) shall be specified, for
               example if the device is intended for adults and/or children and/or
               infants/neonates.

### 2.3. Any contraindications or restrictions for use or limitations of the device shall
               be included.

         The information can be sourced from the IFU, or from the clinical evaluation
         report.

## 3.       A description of the device, including a reference to previous generation(s)
         or variants if such exist, and a description of the differences, as well as,
         where relevant, a description of any accessories, other devices and
         products, which are intended to be used in combination with the device

### 3.1. A description of the device shall be presented, including its operating
              principles and mode(s) of action. Design characteristics should be included,
              for example key functional elements and any materials or substances in
              contact with the patient’s tissues. Include information on whether the device
              is for single use, and its method of sterilisation. For absorbable implants the
              stability retention profile, including time to loss of stability and the absorption
              time, should be provided.
              A picture or drawing can be added accompanied by text.

               Information about the constituents should be provided, as required for the
               IFU53, if the device incorporates
                a medicinal substance (including a human blood or plasma derivative), or
                tissue(s) or cells of human or animal origin, or their derivatives, or
                substances or combinations of substances that are absorbed by or locally
                   dispersed in the human body, or
                materials incorporated into the device that contain or consist of CMR
                   (carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to reproduction) substances or
                   endocrine-disrupting substances, or
                materials that could result in sensitisation or an allergic reaction by the
                   patient or user.

               In Eudamed, the SSCP is associated to one or multiple Basic UDI-DI(s). All
               UDI-DIs/devices associated to this Basic UDI-DI will be seen as having the

     MDR, Annex I (23.2) (e) and (r), and (23.4) (s)

              same SSCP (a UDI-DI/device must always be associated with one and only
              one Basic UDI-DI).

              If the device is a system of several components/devices, each device in the
              system should have a Basic UDI-DI but also one Basic UDI-DI for the
              system. It is the Basic UDI-DI for the system that is intended to be provided in
              section 1.4 in the template, and that will be associated with the SSCP in
              Eudamed. The device system, and any Basic UDI-DIs of included devices,
              should be described in section 3.1.

              The device description in the SSCP shall therefore include all the
              device(s)/device system associated with the same Basic UDI-DI. The
              description of the device(s)/device system should be comprehensive and can
              be presented in different ways to include, if such exist, any configurations /
              combinations / different sizes / specification of any soft-ware versions that
              can be related to safety and/or performance and their release dates / etc.
              The description should also include any model number or similar designation
              used to identify the device(s)/device system.

### 3.2. A reference to previous generation(s) or variants shall be provided, if such
              exist. This applies both to changes/variants of the device itself (same Basic
              UDI-DI) and to previous generation(s) or variants associated with other Basic
              UDI-DIs, if available. A description of the differences shall be provided,
              highlighting the reasons for the change; for example changes to the intended
              clinical benefits, changes to reduce identified clinical risks, or changes for
              manufacturing reasons etc.

### 3.3. If there are any accessories54 that are not themselves devices, but are
              intended by the manufacturer to be used in combination with the device, they
              shall be described or listed. The list of accessories should include all those
              that are essential for the safe and correct use of the device.

### 3.4. If there are any other devices and products intended to be used in
              combination with the device, they shall be described or listed. However,
              generic surgical equipment and/or other generic devices do not need to be
              listed.

         In the part of the SSCP that is intended for patients, section 3 may be limited to
         the device(s) in question (Basic UDI-DI) including relevant and necessary
         accessories from a patient’s perspective; see suggested headings for section 3 in
         the template in the Appendix.

## 4.       Information on any residual risks and any undesirable effects, warnings
         and precautions

### 4.1. Residual risks and undesirable effects

     MDR, Article 2 (2)

            This section of the SSCP guide and template includes residual risks55, other
            than those contraindications, limitations, warnings and precautions that are
            included in sections 2.3 and 4.2.

            Description of residual risks and undesirable effects
            Risk is defined in the MDR56 as the combination of the probability of
            occurrence of harm and the severity of that harm. Harm is defined in the
            standard ISO 14971:201257 as physical injury or damage to the health of
            people, or damage to property or the environment. Thus the term ‘risk’
            includes both clinical and non-clinical harms.

            The term ‘residual risk’ is defined in the standard ISO 14971:2012 58 as “risk
            remaining after risk control measures have been taken”.

            There is a requirement in the MDR that the IFU shall contain information on
            any residual risks and any undesirable side-effects59, i.e. no sort of residual
            risk or undesirable side-effect related to the device is excluded from
            disclosure. The SSCP should contain information on at least the same
            residual risks and undesirable side-effects as included in the IFU.

            For the purpose of the SSCP, an undesirable effect60 can be understood as
            any undesirable side-effect related to the device and that is experienced by
            the patient and/or can be diagnosed and/or measured in the patient.

            For the clarity of the SSCP, undesirable side-effects can be annotated also in
            other terms as appropriate, to present any undesirable side-effects related to
            the device in question. There may be device-specific terminology for
            describing side-effects and risks in device-specific ISO standards or scientific
            literature that is important to use to allow comparison of clinical data.

            For example, some events indicated in the MDR by the terms ‘adverse
            events’61, ‘undesirable side-effects’ or ‘incidents’62, may all be annotated as
            ‘adverse events’ in the scientific literature.
            Any further discussion on risks can be included in the SSCP if needed for
            clarity or comprehension.

            Quantitative data
            The definition of risk63 includes the probability of occurrence of harm.
            Therefore the information in the SSCP on risks shall also include
            quantifications. This information can be sourced from the clinical evaluation

   MDR, Annex I, (23.1) (g)
   MDR, Article 2 (23)
   EN ISO 14971:2012 Medical devices – Application of risk management to medical devices, section 2.2
   EN ISO 14971:2012 Medical devices – Application of risk management to medical devices, section 2.15
   MDR, Annex I , 23.4 (g)
   MDR, Article 32 (2) (h)
   MDR, Article 2 (57)
   MDR, Article 2 (64)
   MDR, Article 2 (23)

            report where an updated examination of qualitative and quantitative aspects
            of clinical safety is available, with clear reference to the determination of
            residual risks and side-effects64.

            It should also be clarified in the SSCP whether quantitative data on side-
            effects or residual risks relate to clinical data that were obtained proactively,
            for example from a structured prospective follow-up study of the device itself,
            or if the expected frequencies65 come from a systematic review of the
            scientific literature. It should be disclosed in the SSCP if data from
            spontaneously reported incidents or serious incidents66 are used as one of
            the sources for estimating quantitative data on side-effects or residual risks,
            in which case significant under-reporting needs to be considered.

            A relation to time should also be included when presenting the quantitative
            data, for example during five or ten years of use from implantation, or
            adverse events per 100 patient-years for implantable devices with constant
            hazards, etc. The quantitative data and the relation to time should always be
            presented together.

            To use tabulated lists for the presentation of side-effects and residual risks
            with quantitative data and a relation to time, may enhance the readability.

            In the part of the SSCP that is intended for patients, residual risks and side-
            effects should be explained and quantified in a way that patients and lay
            persons can understand. A statement should be included about how potential
            risks have been controlled or managed, and also a statement on what to do if
            the patient believes that he/she is experiencing side-effects related to the
            device or its use. See the example in the template in the Appendix.

      4.2. All warnings and precautions pertaining to the device should be presented.
           However warnings and precautions solely related to for example
           installation/preparation of a device or relating to special procedural steps can
           be discussed on a general level in the SSCP if a link (URL) to the IFU on the
           manufacturer’s website is provided.

            Always include any warnings, precautions or measures to be taken by the
            patient or a healthcare professional with regard to reciprocal interference with
            reasonably foreseeable external influences, medical examinations or
            environmental conditions.

            If any particular clinical follow-up is necessary and mentioned in the IFU, that
            information should also be included in the SSCP.

### 4.3. Other relevant aspects of safety should be described. If the device has been
           subject to any field safety corrective action (FSCA including FSN), the date of

   MDR, Annex XIV, Part A Clinical evaluation, (1)
   MDR, Article 88 (1)
   MDR, Article 2 (64) and (65)

            the FSCA and a summary of the associated circumstances and any actions
            undertaken should also be included.

## 5.    The summary of clinical evaluation as referred to in Annex XIV, and relevant
      information on post-market clinical follow-up

      This part of section 5 relates to content intended for the user/healthcare
      professional.

      This section is intended to summarise, in a comprehensive manner, the clinical
      evaluation results and the clinical data67 forming the clinical evidence68 for the
      confirmation of conformity with relevant general safety and performance
      requirements69, the evaluation of undesirable side-effects and the acceptability of
      the benefit-risk ratio70.

      It shall be an objective and balanced summary of the clinical evaluation71 results
      of all the available clinical data related to the device in question, whether
      favourable, unfavourable, and/or inconclusive.

      See suggested headings for this section in the Appendix of this document.

### 5.1. The SSCP should include a statement if conformity of the device was
           assessed and endorsed by the NB on the basis of equivalence. If
           equivalence was used, then the device(s) for which equivalence has been
           demonstrated should be identified by name and Basic UDI-DI if available,
           together with the name(s) of its/their manufacturer(s).

           The SSCP should also include a statement whether the equivalent device’s
           SSCP is available in Eudamed. If not available in Eudamed, the SSCP should
           include a summary of the clinical data pertaining to the equivalent device,
           written in accordance with the recommendations of this section 5, with a clear
           note that it relates to the equivalent device. It should be evident from the
           summary what the clinical evidence for the equivalent device was based on:
           whether it was clinical investigations of that device itself, or if any other data
           were used and then the sources of that data. Also include a summary of how
           long-term safety and performance of the equivalent device has been
           confirmed.

### 5.2. All clinical investigations of the device in question, conducted before the CE-
           marking, should be summarised. It is recommended to keep the format clear
           by grouping the information for each study. The summary of each
           investigation should include the following non-exclusive list:

   MDR, Article 61 (11) and Article 2 (48)
   MDR, Article 2 (51)
   MDR, Annex I
   MDR, Article 61 (1) and Annex XIV, Part A (1)
   MDR, Annex XIV, Part A (2)

              Identity of the investigation/study: If performed under the Medical Device
               Directives or the MDR, then give the CIV ID or single identification
               number. Add reference details if the clinical investigation report is
               available in Eudamed72. For other studies, the title of the study and a clear
               reference to a clinical trials database or publication where detailed data on
               the study can be found (7)73 should be included. In the circumstance that
               the investigation/study was conducted outside EU, identify the country/-ies
               where it was performed.
              Identity of the device including any model number/version
              Intended use of the device in the investigation
              Objectives of the study
              Study design: randomised controlled trial, other pivotal trial, short-term
               feasibility study, other; and the duration of the follow-up
              Primary and secondary endpoint(s)
              Inclusion/exclusion criteria for subject selection
              Number of enrolled subjects, including if applicable in different treatment
               arms
              Study population: main baseline characteristics of each study group,
               including gender and age of enrolled subjects
              Summary of study methods
              Summary of results: any clinical benefits74; any undesirable side-effects or
               adverse events, and their frequency in relation to time; any results on
               long-term benefits or risks, for example implant survival rates at 5 or 10
               years and/or cumulative experience in patient-years. A statement of
               percentage completeness of follow-up should be provided. Add a note if
               the study is still ongoing for long-term follow up.
              Any limitations of the study, such as high loss to follow-up, or potential
               confounding factors that may question the results.
              Any device deficiency and any device replacements related to safety
               and/or performance during the study.

### 5.3. Summary of other clinical data and the main findings pertaining to the device
           itself should be included if available.
           This can be sourced75 for example from:
          A systematic literature review yielding articles in which the device in
              question was used. References to these articles should be provided. A
              bibliography can be added at the end of the SSCP document if there are
              many references.
          Clinically relevant information based on clinical data obtained from the
              implementation of the manufacturer’s PMCF and PMS plans, such as:
               Conducted PMCF investigation(s)76; include information on each study
                   as outlined in section 5.2 in this guide.

   MDR, Article 77 (7)
   WMA Declaration of Helsinki, sections 35, 36, MDR Recital (64)
   MDR, Article 2 (53)
   MDR, Article 2 (48)
   MDR, Article 74 (1)

                New or changed likelihood of an undesirable side-effect(s), or
                   significant increase in the frequency or severity of incidents, or any
                   identified trends77, or any other main findings from the PMCF
                   evaluation report or PSUR78.
              Analysis of clinical data from medical device registries. Any known
               limitations such as incomplete follow-up should be disclosed.

### 5.4. An overall summary of the clinical performance79 and safety should be
            provided, and that is supported by clinical evidence80, based on clinical data
            and the clinical evaluation results pertaining to the device in question. It is
            recommended that the overall summary should include the following:
           The clinical performance normally leads to clinical benefits for the patient.
              Give a description of the documented clinical benefits81 for patients with
              relevant and specified clinical outcome measures, and the success rate for
              achieving the outcome measures. This should be described for all clinical
              claims the manufacturer presents in the IFU, and in any information,
              marketing, or promotional material that it distributes. For a non-absorbable
              implant, there should also be information about the expected lifetime of the
              device including data on implant survival rates.
           Benefit-risk assessment for the various indications including the
              acceptability of the benefit-risk ratio82. This includes a summary of the
              evaluation of undesirable side-effects.

           In the case of a device without an intended medical purpose83, the
           requirement to demonstrate clinical benefit shall be understood as a
           requirement to demonstrate the performance of the device. The summary of
           the clinical evaluation shall be based on relevant data concerning safety and
           performance84.

### 5.5. The SSCP shall have a section on planned or ongoing PMCF85 that should
            include the following (non-exclusive list):
           Summary of the latest approved PMCF plan for the device. Include any
               planned or ongoing studies (brief description), and if there are any
               unanswered questions relating to the use of the device and how they will
               be investigated.
           If any emerging risks, complications or unexpected device failures have
               been detected, and how these will be followed up.

   MDR, Article 88 (1) and Annex XIV Part B (6.1) (b)
   MDR, Article 61 (11), Article 83 (3) (d)
   MDR, Article 2 (52)
   MDR, Article 61 (1) and Article 2 (51)
   MDR, Article 2 (53)
   MDR, Article 61 (1) and Annex I Sections 1 and 8
   MDR, Annex XVI
   MDR, Article 61 (9)
   MDR, Annex XIV Part B

         The information on clinical evaluation and PMCF intended for patients, in
         section 5
         The part of the SSCP intended for patients should be provided with a brief
         summary which enables the patient to understand the basis upon which clinical
         safety and performance has been demonstrated. The summary should include
         the following (non-exclusive list):
             Clinical background of the device
                 A description of the relative novelty of the device: if the product has a
                 proven clinical track record of safety and performance, or if there are one
                 or more novel design features.
             The clinical evidence for the CE marking
                 A description whether clinical evidence is based on data concerning an
                 equivalent device, on data collected during a clinical investigation of the
                 device itself, or on a combination of the two. A short lay-summary of the
                 clinical investigations performed on the device itself should be given, if
                 such exist. If there are clinical investigation reports on the device itself
                 available in Eudamed, this should be stated and identification numbers
                 should be given86 (CIV ID or single identification number). The summary
                 should not make misleading claims regarding the strength of clinical
                 evidence, either by direct reporting or omission.
             Safety
                  A description of the benefit-risk assessments related to safety and
                     performance for each indication claimed by the manufacturer, including
                     information to address benefit-risk issues of interest to specific patient
                     populations, if applicable.
                  A description of how the manufacturer continuously collects information
                     on safety and performance and in particular if any clinical studies
                     (PMCF) are ongoing or planned. A description of the purpose of any
                     such studies, for example to corroborate safety and performance
                     claims based on equivalence data, or to demonstrate long-term safety.

## 6.       Possible diagnostic or therapeutic alternatives

         This part of the SSCP document should contain a review of how the device
         relates, in terms of benefit-risk, to diagnostic or therapeutic alternatives and the
         specific conditions under which the device and its alternatives can be
         considered87.

         If reference is made to the “state of the art”, that statement should be supported
         for example by referring to relevant recognised guidance documents generated
         by specialty medical societies or educational bodies.

         In the part of the SSCP intended for patients the text should include a
         recommendation to discuss any possible diagnostic or therapeutic alternatives

     MDR, Article 77 (7)
     MDR, Recital 49

      with a healthcare professional who can take into consideration the individual
      patient’s situation. See the proposed text in the template in the Appendix.

## 7.    Suggested profile and training for users

      The experience, education and/or training of the intended user(s) shall be
      described88. This includes any specific mandatory training before using the
      device, and any update training for continued safe use of the device.

      If the device is intended to be handled directly by the patient, section 7 should be
      included in the SSCP part intended for patients and any required training should
      be described.

## 8.    Reference to any harmonised standards and CS applied

      A list with all applied common specifications (CS), international standards
      harmonised under the Medical Device Directives (2)(3) and/or the MDR, and
      relevant adopted monographs of the European Pharmacopoeia89 shall be
      provided.

      The year/revision of the applied CS, standard or monograph, should be listed
      together with information whether it was applied in full or in part.

      The year/revision of an applied harmonised standard or CS may change in the
      technical documentation for the device. However, an update of the SSCP
      concerning this change can wait until the next revision of the SSCP is issued.

      This list in section 8 does not need to be included in the part of the SSCP that is
      intended for patients.

## 9.    Revision history

      The SSCP document should include a revision history. The purpose is to include
      the following information:
          The SSCP revision number
          Date when the revision was issued
          Description of the main changes
          In which language the SSCP was validated by the NB
          In case of a SSCP on class IIa implantable or some90 IIb implantable
              devices; whether the SSCP revision has been validated yet or not by the
              NB

   By analogy with the IFU, see MDR, Annex I, 23.1 (a)
   MDR, Article 8 (2)
   MDR, Article 52 (4) 2nd paragraph

      See an example of a table for a Revision history in the Appendix of this guide.

## References
## 1. Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April
   2017 on medical devices
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=OJ:L:2017:117:TOC

## 2. Council Directive 93/42/EEC of 14 June 1993 concerning medical devices
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:01993L0042-20071011

## 3. Council Directive of 20 June 1990 on the approximation of the laws of the Member
   States relating to active implantable medical devices (90/385/EEC)
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:01990L0385-20071011

## 4. The European Survey on Language Competences: measuring foreign language
   student proficiency. Patrícia Costa and Patrícia Albergaria-Almeida / Procedia -
   Social and Behavioral Sciences 191 (2015) 2369 – 2373
   https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S187704281502515X

## 5. Summaries of Clinical Trials Results for Laypersons
   https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol-
   10/2017_01_26_summaries_of_ct_results_for_laypersons.pdf

## 6. Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, teaching,
   assessment (CEFR)
   https://www.coe.int/en/web/common-european-framework-reference-
   languages/home

## 7. WMA Declaration of Helsinki - Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving
   Human Subjects
   https://www.wma.net/policies-post/wma-declaration-of-helsinki-ethical-principles-
   for-medical-research-involving-human-subjects/

Appendix: Template for the SSCP
Texts in italic in the template are general information texts proposed to be included in
the SSCP document.

Note that there shall always be SSCP information dedicated to users/healthcare
professionals for all implantable devices and for all class III devices, other than
custom-made or investigational devices. When relevant, a second part dedicated to
patients/lay persons should be added. See further recommendations on relevant
SSCP information for patients in this guide.

Summary of safety and clinical performance

This Summary of Safety and Clinical Performance (SSCP) is intended to provide public
access to an updated summary of the main aspects of the safety and clinical
performance of the device.

The SSCP is not intended to replace the Instructions For Use as the main document to
ensure the safe use of the device, nor is it intended to provide diagnostic or therapeutic
suggestions to intended users or patients.

The following information is intended for users/healthcare professionals.

If the SSCP includes a part intended for patients, the following can be added:
Following this information there is a summary intended for patients.

Manufacturer’s reference number for the SSCP

## 1. Device identification and general information
### 1.1. Device trade name(s)
### 1.2. Manufacturer’s name and address
### 1.3. Manufacturer’s single registration number (SRN)
### 1.4. Basic UDI-DI
### 1.5. Medical device nomenclature description / text
### 1.6. Class of device
### 1.7. Year when the first certificate (CE) was issued covering the device
### 1.8. Authorised representative if applicable; name and the SRN
### 1.9. NB’s name (the NB that will validate the SSCP) and the NB’s single
        identification number

## 2. Intended use of the device
### 2.1. Intended purpose
### 2.2. Indication(s) and target population(s)
### 2.3. Contraindications and/or limitations

## 3. Device description
### 3.1. Description of the device
### 3.2. A reference to previous generation(s) or variants if such exist, and a
        description of the differences
### 3.3. Description of any accessories which are intended to be used in combination
        with the device
### 3.4. Description of any other devices and products which are intended to be used
        in combination with the device

## 4. Risks and warnings
### 4.1. Residual risks and undesirable effects
### 4.2. Warnings and precautions
### 4.3. Other relevant aspects of safety, including a summary of any field safety
         corrective action (FSCA including FSN) if applicable

## 5. Summary of clinical evaluation and post-market clinical follow-up (PMCF)
### 5.1. Summary of clinical data related to equivalent device, if applicable
### 5.2. Summary of clinical data from conducted investigations of the device before
        the CE-marking, if applicable
### 5.3. Summary of clinical data from other sources, if applicable

### 5.4. An overall summary of the clinical performance and safety
### 5.5. Ongoing or planned post-market clinical follow-up

## 6. Possible diagnostic or therapeutic alternatives

## 7. Suggested profile and training for users

## 8. Reference to any harmonised standards and CS applied

## 9. Revision history

SSCP       Date     Change description                 Revision validated by the Notified
revision   issued                                      Body
number

                                                            Yes
                                                             Validation language:
                                                            No (only applicable for class IIa or
                                                       some IIb implantable devices (MDR,
                                                       Article 52 (4) 2nd paragraph) for which
                                                       the SSCP is not yet validated by the NB)

                                                          Yes
                                                           Validation language:
                                                          No

If the SSCP concerns a device for which it is relevant to provide information to patients
in lay man’s language, the following text can be included and then followed by a “page
break”:
A summary of the safety and clinical performance of the device, intended for patients,
is given below.

Summary of safety and clinical performance
Document revision:
Date issued:

This Summary of Safety and Clinical Performance (SSCP) is intended to provide public
access to an updated summary of the main aspects of the safety and clinical
performance of the device. The information presented below is intended for patients or
lay persons. A more extensive summary of its safety and clinical performance
prepared for healthcare professionals is found in the first part of this document.

The SSCP is not intended to give general advice on the treatment of a medical
condition. Please contact your healthcare professional in case you have questions
about your medical condition or about the use of the device in your situation. This
SSCP is not intended to replace an Implant card or the Instructions For Use to provide
information on the safe use of the device.

## 1. Device identification and general information
   o Device trade name
   o Manufacturer; name and address

   o Basic UDI-DI
   o Year when the device was first CE-marked

## 2. Intended use of the device
   o Intended purpose
   o Indications and intended patient groups
   o Contraindications

## 3. Device description
   o Device description and material/substances in contact with patient tissues
   o Information about medicinal substances in the device, if any
   o Description of how the device is achieving its intended mode of action
   o Description of accessories, if any

## 4. Risks and warnings
   Contact your healthcare professional if you believe that you are experiencing side-
   effects related to the device or its use or if you are concerned about risks. This
   document is not intended to replace a consultation with your healthcare
   professional if needed.

   o How potential risks have been controlled or managed
   o Remaining risks and undesirable effects
   o Warnings and precautions
   o Summary of any field safety corrective action, (FSCA including FSN) if
     applicable

## 5. Summary of clinical evaluation and post-market clinical follow-up
   o Clinical background of the device
   o The clinical evidence for the CE-marking
   o Safety

## 6. Possible diagnostic or therapeutic alternatives
   When considering alternative treatments, it is recommended to contact your
   healthcare professional who can take into account your individual situation.

   o General description of therapeutic alternatives

## 7. Suggested training for users
