# Summary of Safety and Clinical Performance

Provide an overview of clinical data, safety information, and performance characteristics for your **Class III medical device**.

The summary of safety and clinical performance (SSCP) is a public-facing document that is mandatory for class III medical devices under EU MDR. It serves as a key document for transparency, providing safety and performance data to the public and healthcare professionals.

The SSCP should be reviewed and updated annually following the PMCF evaluation report and periodic safety update report (PSUR) so that they are aligned with the most recent evidence from the technical documentation.

## Minimum Requirements

This the information we expect to see in an SSCP, the bulk of which you will have covered elsewhere in your technical file.

- **Introduction** - Outline the purpose of the SSCP, tailoring the wording to healthcare professionals and lay persons, respectively. See the Deep dive section for wording recommended by MDCG 2019-9.
- **Device identification** - Provide details of the version of the device that the SSCP describes, including the intended purpose statement.
- **Device description** - Include the basic UDI-DI, mode of action, reference to previous versions and explanation of differences.
- **Risks and warnings** - Detail how risks are controlled, residual risks, side effects, warnings and precautions.
- **Training** - Provide evidence of training materials necessary for healthcare professionals and/or lay users. Refer to the relevant section of the instructions for use document, which should be part of your technical submission.
- **Summary of clinical activities** - Include all available data with objectivity, referencing the clinical evaluation report, post-market clinical follow-up report and periodic safety report.

## Desired Format

We really want to review your documents and these tips will enable us to do that:

- Upload narrative documents as text files (.DOCX or .PDF) formats for written reports.
- Upload spreadsheets (.XLSX) files for detailed or data-intensive evidence, like literature searches or appraisals of clinical data.
- Keep your files searchable, avoiding scanned PDFs or locked documents.

While not a requirement, we love to see a traceability matrix that connects clinical benefit claims to related clinical performance data. This has the following constituents:

- **Clinical benefit** - The claimed positive impact of a device on the health of an individual, patient management or public health.
- **Outcome measure** - The quantifiable metric used to assess the effectiveness, safety, or performance of a medical intervention.
- **Clinical performance claim** - A claimed ability of the device, resulting from its characteristics, to achieve its intended purpose, thereby leading to a clinical benefit.
- **State-of-the-art performance benchmark** - Related to some state-of-the-art data from similar devices, alternative pathways, or alternative treatments.
- **Clinical evaluation activity** - Clinical performance data generated by testing the device under evaluation or an equivalent device, in its intended target population and for its intended use.
- **Clinical evaluation activity endpoint** - The relevant clinical evaluation variable that was measured to determine the effect of the intervention.
- **Clinical performance data** - Clinical performance findings from the clinical evaluation activity.

## Deep Dive

### Expected Content: Introduction

Separating the information appropriate for healthcare professionals from that which is relevant to lay persons is useful for readers of this document.

**For healthcare professionals**

MDCG 2019-9 recommends using the following wording for healthcare professionals, included in their SSCP template.

> *This Summary of Safety and Clinical Performance (SSCP) is intended to provide public access to an updated summary of the main aspects of the safety and clinical performance of the device.*
>
> *The SSCP is not intended to replace the Instructions For Use as the main document to ensure the safe use of the device, nor is it intended to provide diagnostic or therapeutic suggestions to intended users or patients.*
>
> *Where indicated, the information presented below is intended for users/healthcare professionals.*

**For lay persons**

Include the introductory text for the SSCP prepared for lay persons. MDCG 2019-9 recommends using the wording included in their SSCP template, below.

> *This Summary of Safety and Clinical Performance (SSCP) is intended to provide public access to an updated summary of the main aspects of the safety and clinical performance of the device. Where indicated, the information presented below is intended for patients or lay persons. A more extensive summary of its safety and clinical performance prepared for healthcare professionals can also be found in this document.*
>
> *The SSCP is not intended to give general advice on the treatment of a medical condition. Please contact your healthcare professional in case you have questions about your medical condition or about the use of the device in your situation. This SSCP is not intended to replace an Implant card or the Instructions For Use to provide information on the safe use of the device.*

### Expected Content: Device Identification

Again information is separated according to audience. Indicate whether the intended user is a lay person. Key elements, such as the intended purpose statement, will feature in both sections.

**For healthcare professionals**

Provide the following:

- Device trade name(s).
- Manufacturer's name and address.
- Manufacturer's single registration number (SRN).
- Basic UDI-DI.
- Medical device nomenclature description.
- Intended purpose statement.
- Class of device.
- Year of initial certification.
- Authorised representative name and SRN (if applicable).
- Notified body's name and ID number.

**For lay persons**

Provide the following:

- Device trade name.
- Manufacturer's name and address.
- Basic UDI-DI.
- Intended purpose statement.
- Year the device was first CE-marked.

### Expected Content: Device Description

**For healthcare professionals**

Include:

- Description of the device.
- Operating principles and mode(s) of action.
- The Basic UDI-DI of the device(s).
- Reference to previous versions and explanation of differences.
- Description of accessories used with the device.
- Description of any other compatible products or devices.

**For lay persons**

Include:

- Description of the device.
- Explanation of how the device works.
- Description of any accessories.

### Expected Content: Risks and Warnings

**Source**

Provide a description of:

- Risk evaluations (where residual risks remain).
- Undesirable side effects.
- Data collection for quantitative risk data.
- Warnings.
- Precautions.
- Field safety corrective action (FSCA) reports since the last SSCP.

**For healthcare professionals**

Include:

- Residual risks and undesirable effects.
- Warnings and precautions.
- Safety-related actions, including any FSCA summaries.

**For lay persons**

Include:

- How risks are controlled.
- Remaining risks and side effects.
- Warnings and precautions.
- Summary of any safety alerts or recalls.

### Expected Content: Training

**Source**

Refer to the relevant section of the instructions for use document, which should be part of your technical submission.

**For healthcare professionals**

Provide training materials intended for healthcare professionals.

**For lay persons**

Provide training materials appropriate for lay users of the device.

### Expected Content: Summary of Clinical Activities

**Source**

Provide details of:

- Clinical evaluation report (CER)
- Post-market clinical follow-up (PMCF) report
- Periodic safety update report (PSUR)
- Equivalence device data (if applicable)

The summary should focus on all available clinical data and be objective and balanced - including both favourable and unfavourable data. All investigations conducted prior to CE marking should be summarised, providing details such as the objectives, study population, methods and results of each investigation.

Additional clinical data from literature reviews, risk management, PMCF investigations or findings from PSURs is also expected. This includes details of alternative treatments and care pathways that may have emerged from a literature review. An overall summary of the clinical performance and safety of the device shall also be included.

**For healthcare professionals**

Include:

- A summary of clinical data for equivalent devices.
- A summary of data from pre-market investigations.
- A summary of data from other sources.
- An overall summary of clinical performance and safety.
- Details on any ongoing or planned PMCF activities.

**For lay persons**

Include:

- Basic clinical background of the device.
- Overview of clinical evidence supporting CE-marking.
- Summary of safety findings.
